Real Estate Agents Act (Professional Conduct and Client
Care) Rules 2012
(SR 2012/413)
Pursuant to section 14 of the Real Estate Agents Act 2008, the Real Estate Agents
Authority, with the approval of the Minister of Justice given in accordance with sec-
tion 17 of that Act, and after consultation in accordance with section 16 of that Act,
makes the following rules.
Contents
Page
Title
Commencement
Scope and objectives
Interpretation
Standards of professional competence
Standards of professional conduct
Duty to report misconduct or unsatisfactory conduct
Duties and obligations of agents
Client and customer care
Client and customer care for sellers’ agents
Client and customer care for buyers’ agents
Information about complaints
Revocation
Note
Changes authorised by subpart 2 of Part 2 of the Legislation Act 2012 have been made in this official reprint.
Note 4 at the end of this reprint provides a list of the amendments incorporated.
These rules are administered by the Real Estate Agents Authority.
Reprint
as at 1 December 2020
Rules
Title
These rules are the Real Estate Agents Act (Professional Conduct and Client
Care) Rules 2012.
Commencement
These rules come into force on 8 April 2013.
Scope and objectives
3.1
These practice rules setting out a code of professional conduct and client care
have been prepared by the Real Estate Agents Authority (the Authority). They
constitute the Professional Conduct and Client Care Rules required by section
14 of the Real Estate Agents Act 2008.
3.2
These practice rules set out the standard of conduct and client care that agents,
branch managers, and salespersons (collectively referred to as licensees) are
required to meet when carrying out real estate agency work and dealing with
clients.
3.3
These practice rules are not an exhaustive statement of the conduct expected of
licensees. They set minimum standards that licensees must observe and are a
reference point for discipline. A charge of misconduct or unsatisfactory con-
duct may be brought and dealt with despite the charge not being based on a
breach of any specific rule.
3.4
These practice rules must be read in conjunction with the Act and regulations,
and do not repeat duties and obligations that are included in the Act or regula-
tions.
Interpretation
4.1
In these rules,—
Act means the Real Estate Agents Act 2008
customer means a person who is a party or potential party to a transaction and
excludes a prospective client and a client
prospective client means a person who is considering or intending to enter into
an agency agreement with an agent to carry out real estate agency work
regulations means regulations made pursuant to the Act.
4.2
Unless the context otherwise requires, terms used in these rules have the same
meaning as in the Act.
Standards of professional competence
5.1
A licensee must exercise skill, care, competence, and diligence at all times
when carrying out real estate agency work.
r 1
5.2
A licensee must have a sound knowledge of the Act, regulations, rules issued
by the Authority (including these rules), and other legislation relevant to real
estate agency work.
Standards of professional conduct
6.1
A licensee must comply with fiduciary obligations to the licensee’s client.
6.2
A licensee must act in good faith and deal fairly with all parties engaged in a
transaction.
6.3
A licensee must not engage in any conduct likely to bring the industry into dis-
repute.
6.4
A licensee must not mislead a customer or client, nor provide false informa-
tion, nor withhold information that should by law or in fairness be provided to
a customer or client.
Duty to report misconduct or unsatisfactory conduct
7.1
A licensee who has reasonable grounds to suspect that another licensee has
been guilty of unsatisfactory conduct1 may make a report to the Authority.
7.2
A licensee who has reasonable grounds to suspect that another licensee has
been guilty of misconduct2 must make a report to the Authority.
7.3
A licensee must not use, or threaten to use, the complaints or disciplinary
process for an improper purpose.
7.4
If a licensee learns that a person is committing an offence by undertaking real
estate agency work without a licence, the licensee must immediately report the
matter to the Authority.
Duties and obligations of agents
Promoting awareness of rules
8.1
An agent who is operating as a business must display these rules prominently
in the public area of each office or branch, and provide access to them on every
website maintained by the agent for the purposes of the business.
8.2
A licensee must make these rules available to any person on request.
Supervision and management of salespersons
8.3
An agent who is operating as a business must ensure that all salespersons
employed or engaged by the agent are properly supervised and managed.3
Unsatisfactory conduct is defined in the Act: see section 72.
Misconduct is defined in the Act: see section 73.
The Act defines what is meant by a salesperson being properly supervised and managed by an
agent or a branch manager for the purposes of section 50 of the Act: see section 50(2).
r 8
Ensuring knowledge of regulatory framework and promoting continuing
education
8.4
An agent who is operating as a business must ensure that all licensees
employed or engaged by the agent have a sound knowledge of the Act, regula-
tions, rules issued by the Authority (including these rules), and other legislation
relevant to real estate agency work.
8.5
An agent who is operating as a business must ensure that licensees employed
or engaged by the agent are aware of and have the opportunity to undertake any
continuing education required by the Authority.
Client and customer care
General
9.1
A licensee must act in the best interests of a client and act in accordance with
the client’s instructions unless to do so would be contrary to law.
9.2
A licensee must not engage in any conduct that would put a prospective client,
client, or customer under undue or unfair pressure.
9.3
A licensee must communicate regularly and in a timely manner and keep the
client well informed of matters relevant to the client’s interest, unless otherwise
instructed by the client.
9.4
A licensee must not mislead customers as to the price expectations of the cli-
ent.
9.5
A licensee must take due care to—
(a)
ensure the security of land and every business in respect of which the
licensee is carrying out real estate agency work; and
(b)
avoid risks of damage that may arise from customers, or clients that are
not the owner of the land or business, accessing the land or business.
9.6
Unless authorised by a client, through an agency agreement, a licensee must
not offer or market any land or business, including by putting details on any
website or by placing a sign on the property.
Agency agreements and contractual documents
9.7
Before a prospective client, client, or customer signs an agency agreement, a
sale and purchase agreement, or other contractual document, a licensee must—
(a)
recommend that the person seek legal advice; and
(b)
ensure that the person is aware that he or she can, and may need to, seek
technical or other advice and information; and
(c)
allow that person a reasonable opportunity to obtain the advice referred
to in paragraphs (a) and (b).
9.8
A licensee must not take advantage of a prospective client’s, client’s, or cus-
tomer’s inability to understand relevant documents where such inability is
reasonably apparent.
r 9
9.9
A licensee must not submit an agency agreement or a sale and purchase agree-
ment or other contractual document to any person for signature unless all
material particulars have been inserted into or attached to the document.
9.10
A licensee must explain to a prospective client that if he or she enters into or
has already entered into other agency agreements, he or she could be liable to
pay full commission to more than 1 agent in the event that a transaction is con-
cluded.
9.11
On notice of cancellation of an agency agreement being given or received by
the agent under the agreement, the agent must advise the client, in writing, of
the name of each customer (if any) in respect of whom the agent would claim a
commission, were the customer to conclude a transaction with the client.
9.12
An agent must not impose conditions on a client through an agency agreement
that are not reasonably necessary to protect the interests of the agent.
9.13
When authorised by a client to incur expenses, a licensee must seek to obtain
the best value for the client.
Conflicts of interest
9.14
A licensee must not act in a capacity that would attract more than 1 commis-
sion in the same transaction.
9.15
A licensee must not engage in business or professional activity other than real
estate agency work where the business or activity would, or could reasonably
be expected to, compromise the discharge of the licensee’s obligations.
Confidentiality
9.16
A licensee must not use information that is confidential to a client for the bene-
fit of any other person or of the licensee.
9.17
A licensee must not disclose confidential personal information relating to a cli-
ent unless—
(a)
the client consents in writing; or
(b)
disclosure is necessary to answer or defend any complaint, claim, allega-
tion, or proceedings against the licensee by the client; or
(c)
the licensee is required by law to disclose the information; or
(d)
the disclosure is consistent with the information privacy principles set
out in section 22 of the Privacy Act 2020.
9.18
Where a licensee discloses information under rule 9.17(b), (c) or (d), it may be
only to the appropriate person or entity and only to the extent necessary for the
permitted purpose.
Rule 9.17(d): amended, on 1 December 2020, by section 217 of the Privacy Act 2020 (2020 No 31).
r 9
Client and customer care for sellers’ agents
10.1
This rule applies to an agent (and any licensee employed or engaged by the
agent) who is entering, or has entered, into an agency agreement with a client
for the grant, sale, or other disposal of land or a business.
Appraisals and pricing
10.2
An appraisal of land or a business must—
(a)
be provided in writing to a client by a licensee; and
(b)
realistically reflect current market conditions; and
(c)
be supported by comparable information on sales of similar land in simi-
lar locations or businesses.
10.3
Where no directly comparable or semi-comparable sales data exists, a licensee
must explain this, in writing, to a client.
10.4
An advertised price must clearly reflect the pricing expectations agreed with
the client.
Relationship between prospective client’s choices about how to sell and
licensee’s benefits
10.5
Before a prospective client signs an agency agreement, the licensee must
explain to the prospective client how choices that the prospective client may
make about how to sell or otherwise dispose of his or her land or business
could impact on the individual benefits that the licensee may receive.
Agency agreements
10.6
Before a prospective client signs an agency agreement, a licensee must explain
to the prospective client and set out in writing—
(a)
the conditions under which commission must be paid and how commis-
sion is calculated, including an estimated cost (actual $ amount) of com-
mission payable by the client, based on the appraisal provided under rule
10.2:
(b)
when the agency agreement ends:
(c)
how the land or business will be marketed and advertised, including any
additional expenses that such advertising and marketing will incur:
(d)
that the client is not obliged to agree to the additional expenses referred
to in rule 10.6(c):
(e)
that further information on agency agreements and contractual docu-
ments is available from the Authority and how to access this informa-
tion.
Disclosure of defects
10.7
A licensee is not required to discover hidden or underlying defects in land but
must disclose known defects to a customer. Where it would appear likely to a
r 10
reasonably competent licensee that land may be subject to hidden or underlying
defects4, a licensee must either—
(a)
obtain confirmation from the client, supported by evidence or expert
advice, that the land in question is not subject to defect; or
(b)
ensure that a customer is informed of any significant potential risk so
that the customer can seek expert advice if the customer so chooses.
10.8
A licensee must not continue to act for a client who directs that information of
the type referred to in rule 10.7 be withheld.
Advertising and marketing
10.9
A licensee must not advertise any land or business on terms that are different
from those authorised by the client.
Contractual documentation and record keeping
10.10 A licensee must submit to the client all offers concerning the grant, sale, or
other disposal of any land or business, provided that such offers are in writing.
10.11 If a licensee is employed or engaged by an agent, the licensee must provide the
agent with a copy of every written offer that the licensee submits.
10.12 An agent must retain, for a period of 12 months, a copy of every written offer
submitted. This rule applies regardless of whether the offer was submitted by
the agent or by a licensee employed or engaged by the agent and regardless of
whether the offer resulted in a transaction.
Client and customer care for buyers’ agents
11.1
This rule applies where an agency agreement authorising an agent to undertake
real estate agency work for a client in respect of the purchase or other acquisi-
tion of land or a business on the client’s behalf (a buyer’s agency agreement)
is being entered into, or has been entered into.
11.2
Before a prospective client signs a buyer’s agency agreement, a licensee must
explain to the prospective client and set out in writing—
(a)
the conditions under which commission must be paid and how commis-
sion is calculated, including an estimated cost (actual $ amount) of com-
mission payable by the client, based on the average of the estimated
price range of the land or business that the client is seeking to purchase:
For example, houses built within a particular period of time, and of particular materials, are or
may be at risk of weathertightness problems. A licensee could reasonably be expected to know
of this risk (whether or not a seller directly discloses any weathertightness problems). While a
customer is expected to inquire into risks regarding a property and to undertake the necessary
inspections and seek advice, the licensee must not simply rely on caveat emptor. This example
is provided by way of guidance only and does not limit the range of issues to be taken into
account under rule 10.7.
r 11
(b)
when the agency agreement ends:
(c)
any additional services that the licensee will provide, or arrange for the
provision of, on the client’s behalf and the expenses relating to those ser-
vices payable by the client:
(d)
that the client is not obliged to agree to the additional expenses referred
to in rule 11.2(c):
(e)
that further information on agency agreements and contractual docu-
ments is available from the Authority and how to access this informa-
tion.
11.3
A licensee must not undertake real estate agency work with customers, or other
licensees, on terms that are different from those that are authorised by the client
on whose behalf the licensee is carrying out real estate agency work.
11.4
A licensee must submit all offers that the licensee is instructed by the client to
make concerning the purchase or acquisition of any land or business, provided
that such offers are in writing.
11.5
If a licensee is employed or engaged by an agent, the licensee must provide the
agent with a copy of every written offer that the licensee submits.
11.6
An agent must retain, for a period of 12 months, a copy of every written offer
submitted. This rule applies regardless of whether the offer was submitted by
the agent or by a licensee employed or engaged by the agent and regardless of
whether the offer resulted in a transaction.
Information about complaints
12.1
An agent must develop and maintain written in-house procedures for dealing
with complaints and dispute resolution. A copy of these procedures must be
available to clients and consumers.
12.2
A licensee must ensure that prospective clients and customers are aware of
these procedures before they enter into any contractual agreements.
12.3
A licensee must also ensure that prospective clients, clients, and customers are
aware that they may access the Authority’s complaints process without first
using the in-house procedures; and that any use of the in-house procedures
does not preclude their making a complaint to the Authority.
12.4
A licensee employed or engaged by an agent must advise the agent within 10
working days of becoming aware of—
(a)
any complaint made to the Authority against them, the decision of the
Complaints Assessment Committee made in respect of that complaint,
and any order made by the Committee in respect of that complaint; and
(b)
if the matter proceeds to the Tribunal, the decision of the Tribunal in
respect of the matter, and any order made by the Tribunal in respect of
the matter.
r 12
12.5
If a licensee was employed or engaged by a different agent at the time of the
conduct relevant to the complaint referred to in rule 12.4, the licensee must
also provide the information referred to in rule 12.4(a) and (b) to that agent
within 10 working days of becoming aware of the complaint.
Revocation
The Real Estate Agents Act (Professional Conduct and Client Care) Rules
2009 (SR 2009/304) are revoked.
Dated at Wellington this 11th day of December 2012.
The Common Seal of the Real Estate Agents Authority was affixed in the presence
of:
[Seal]
Kristy McDonald,
Chair.
Peter McDermott,
Board member.
Issued under the authority of the Legislation Act 2012.
Date of notification in Gazette: 13 December 2012.
r 13
Reprints notes
General
This is a reprint of the Real Estate Agents Act (Professional Conduct and Cli-
ent Care) Rules 2012 that incorporates all the amendments to those rules as at
the date of the last amendment to them.
Legal status
Reprints are presumed to correctly state, as at the date of the reprint, the law
enacted by the principal enactment and by any amendments to that enactment.
Section 18 of the Legislation Act 2012 provides that this reprint, published in
electronic form, has the status of an official version under section 17 of that
Act. A printed version of the reprint produced directly from this official elec-
tronic version also has official status.
Editorial and format changes
Editorial and format changes to reprints are made using the powers under sec-
tions 24 to 26 of the Legislation Act 2012. See also http://www.pco.parlia-
ment.govt.nz/editorial-conventions/.
Amendments incorporated in this reprint
Privacy Act 2020 (2020 No 31): section 217
Wellington, New Zealand:
Published under the authority of the New Zealand Government—2020
Notes